EMPLOYEE
HANDBOOKTABLE OF
CONTENTS
Welcome
Message
District
Information
Vision & Mission
Company Values
Policy Information
Employee Acknowledgement
01
02
03
04
05
36
Important Contact
37WELCOME
MESSAGE
Welcome to Flagstaff Unified School District! Thank you for making
FUSD your Workplace of Choice and being a member of our caring and
dedicated staff. The Governing Board and administration look forward
to working collaboratively with you to carry out our district’s mission.
Providing all students with a high-quality education through diverse
pathways to foster success in college, career, citizenship and life. It is
a great privilege to have the opportunity each day to positively impact
students’ lives, and instill the skills and inspiration each student needs
to be on a path of success.
The purpose of this handbook is to provide essential information and
procedures needed to deliver a quality education and environment for
students. This handbook describes professional expectations and
necessary conditions for our very important work together - the
teaching and learning of our students. I hope this will be a valuable tool
for you to use to understand how the school district operates and serve
as a reference guide for answering questions about your employment.
By demonstrating the expectations in this handbook and FUSD’s core
values: COMMITMENT to Learning, Culture of INNOVATION, and a
GROWTH Mindset- you will prepare our students to become the future
leaders, innovators, caretakers and citizens of our community.
Michael Penca
SuperintendentDISTRICT
INFORMATION
The Flagstaff Unified School District is filled with hard working and
dedicated professionals who support students in their academic,
emotional and physical development to grow into adults who will be leaders in our community or the community in which they choose to
live. Here at FUSD we believe that ALL can be successful and when we
are committed high expectations and to continuous improvement.
We cultivate grit and effort in both our
staff and students. We empower each
other to be innovative and look at things
differently. We possess the courage to
take informed risks, try new approaches
and embrace mistakes as learning
opportunities. We are committed to
being accessible to our parents and
community and providing resources,
facilities, and requirements of a STEAM
based education.
theVISION
We will provide a challenging and supportive learning community in
which our students may explore and develop their unique interests
and skills in order to reach their highest potential.
MISSION
The Flagstaff Unified School District provides all students with a high
quality education through diverse pathways to foster success in college,
career, citizenship, and life.COMPANY
VALUES
Commitment to Learning
Possess a high purpose and duty to the quality education of students.
Dedicated to the ongoing development of our students and staff.
Accessible and able to partner with parents and community. Provide the
resources and facilities to meet the competencies of a STEAM education.
Culture of Innovation
Look at things differently and understand new perspectives. Possess the
courage to take informed risks and cultivate new partnerships. Embrace
mistakes as learning opportunities. Adapt to the changing needs of a 21st
century education.
Growth Mindset
Believe everyone can be successful and empowered to pursue their
passion and future. Understand barriers to achievement can be overcome
with quality teaching and learning. Maintain high expectations and
commitment to continuous improvement. Cultivate grit, effort and high
efficacy.POLICY
INFORMATION
The District’s Policy Manual contains the policies of the Governing Board along
with procedures. These documents form the basis of the governance of the
District.
For access, the Policy Manual is housed in an electronic format. Each District
employee is charged to comply with the direction established in the Manual,
and, with keeping up-to-date as new and adjusted policies, procedures, and
forms are determined appropriate by the Governing Board and Superintendent.
A breach in adherence to policy could result in disciplinary action. Your
immediate supervisor and the Human Resource department will keep you
informed of Manual adjustments, and, is the person and department you should
go to when you have questions regarding any aspect of the documents found
within the Manual.
Should inconsistencies occur in the interpretation of policies, procedures, and
forms, applicable laws and regulations shall prevail.
For information regarding the content of the District’s Policy Manual and its
utilization, employees should review the Manual’s Introduction. The policy
manual can be found online on the District Website or by clicking FUSD POLICY
MANUAL.
This employee handbook gives balance to the needs of the organization and its
employees. It is prepared for informational purposes, does not constitute a
contract of employment between the Flagstaff Unified School District and its
employees, and it should not be construed as such. The employee handbook is a
resource that helps inform employees of expectations and services available. By
thoroughly reading this resource and any applicable contract and/or
comprehensive agreement, employees will be informed of benefits and
opportunities as well as of potential consequences of failure to meet the
expectations of the Flagstaff Unified School District.POLICY
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
The Flagstaff Unified School District shall abide by all applicable state
and federal laws, rules, regulations, and executive orders with respect to
the provision of equal educational opportunities and shall not
discriminate against any person based upon that person's race, color,
religion, disability, pregnancy and parenting, sex (including sexual
orientation and gender identity), national origin, veteran's status, genetic
code, or political affiliation. Students and parents/legal guardians may
submit a grievance to allege the following: Student's constitutional rights
have been violated; Student has been denied equal opportunity to
participate in a District program or activity for which the student
otherwise qualifies; Student has been treated discriminatorily on the
basis of race, color, religion, sex (sexual orientation or gender), national
origin, disability, veteran's status, genetic code, or political affiliation; and
Student is concerned for the student's personal safety. Grievances
should be submitted to the Compliance Officer within thirty (30) calendar
days of the date the complainant becomes aware of the alleged
discriminatory action. The District shall not retaliate against any person
who reports discrimination or harassment as set forth in this Policy or
participates in an investigation or proceeding regarding the same. The
District's Compliance Officer(s) are as follows:
Section 504/ADA Compliance Officer: John Shirk - Director Student
Support Services, 3285 East Sparrow Ave. Flagstaff, AZ 86004,
jshirk@fusd1.org 928-527-6178.
Title IV/VI Compliance Officer: John Shirk - Director Student Support
Services, 3285 East Sparrow Ave. Flagstaff, AZ 86004, jshirk@fusd1.org
928-527-6178.POLICY
TITLE IX
Title IX of the Federal Education Amendments Act protects people from
discrimination based on sex in education programs, or activities that
receive Federal financial assistance. The District does not discriminate
based on sex and adheres to all conditions established by Title IX by
recognizing the right of every student who attends the District to do so
without the fear of sexual harassment. Title IX Coordinator The District is
obligated to identify an employee to serve as the Title IX Coordinator and
authorize that individual to coordinate and facilitate the District’s
compliance efforts regarding its responsibilities under Title IX, including
inquiries about the application of Title IX or formal complaints. The
District’s Title IX Coordinator is:
Mike Vogler - Director of Research & Assessment, 3285 East Sparrow Ave.
Flagstaff, AZ 86004, mvogler@fusd1.org 928-527-6143.
SERVICE ANIMALS
"Service animal" means any dog or miniature horse that is individually
trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a
disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other
mental disability. Service animal does not include other species of
animals, whether wild or domestic or trained or untrained. The crime
deterrent effects of an animal's presence and the provision of emotional
support, well-being, comfort, or companionship does not constitute work
or tasks. The Superintendent shall allow for the presence of service
animals in District schools or on District owned property in accordance
with applicable laws, while safeguarding the health, safety, and welfare of
students, staff, and visitors. The District prohibits discrimination against
individuals with disabilities for the use of service animals if the work or
tasks performed by the service animal are directly related to the
individual's disability.POLICY
SAFETY & EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT
The District shall develop security plans and procedures to protect the
safety of students, staff, visitors, and others present on District property
or at school-sponsored events. The Superintendent shall develop
requirements to protect the security of each campus and District
building, including security controls to prevent unauthorized visitors on
campus. The District shall require all volunteers who may perform
services on a District campus or with a District student to provide
fingerprint clearance or a background check as required by A.R.S. § 15-
512. The District shall comply with requisite notification requirements
regarding sex offenders and juveniles who have been adjudicated as
dangerous or sex offenders. The District shall implement procedures to
safeguard District property. The District does not assume responsibility
for the loss of, or damage to, personal property stored, installed, or used
on District property. The Governing Board grants to the Superintendent
authority to delay the start or to close schools in the case of an
emergency.
STAFF ASSIGNMENTS
All staff assignments shall be based on the needs of the District and staff
will be assigned based on the individuals qualifications, and their
expressed desires. When it is not possible to meet all conditions, an
employee shall be assigned first in accordance with the needs of the
District, second where the Superintendent determines the employee is
most qualified to service, and third to the expressed preference of the
employee. No right to an assignment in a specific department, position,
school, grade, or teaching assignment shall be infered from the staff
member's contract or notice of appointment. Certified staff may apply
for a transfer whether or not a vacancy exists, however, transfers will not
be approved by the Superintendent during the school year unless the
needs of the District dictate such approval. All vacancies will be posted
on the District website. Staff interested in applying for posted vacancies
shall have the responsibility for applying to Human Resources for any
position for which the staff is interested and qualified.POLICY
EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE
The District may exercise its authority to discipline an employee for
misconduct that occurs:
During the course of the employee's workday;
While the employee is on District property or while participating in
school or work-related events;
Before or after regular work hours if the employee is engaged in
activities on behalf of the District;
Off campus and during non-working hours, if there is a sufficient
relationship between the employee's conduct and the District's
legitimate interests; and
In any other circumstance in which the District can lawfully exert its
authority to discipline an employee for misconduct.
Supervising administrators are expected to exercise discretion in
determining whether a particular alleged violation merits discipline.
Possible consequences for misconduct may include non-disciplinary
action and/or disciplinary action.
Non-disciplinary actions include, but are not limited to:
Informal consultations or counseling;
Verbal warnings;
Letters of direction or memoranda containing directives or
instructions for future conduct;
Reassignments;
Administrative leave with pay;
Non-renewals of employment for the ensuing school year; or
Civil and/or criminal reporting.
The procedures outlined below do not apply to non-disciplinary
actions. General provisions for discipline are as follows:
No continuing teacher shall be nonrenewed, dismissed, suspended,
reprimanded, or reduced in rank or compensation without just cause. Any
such action by the Board or representative thereof shall be subject to the
grievance procedure.
If a meeting with an administrator results in a reprimand, warning, or
disciplinary action for any infraction of Board policy, rules, or regulations,
or for delinquency in professional performance, a teacher shall have the
right to a subsequent meeting to discuss such allegations.POLICY
EMPLOYEE TERMINATION -
CERTIFIED
The termination of a certificated employee who is under contract for the
major portion of the school year is governed by state law, including but
not limited to A.R.S. § 15-538.01; A.R.S. § 15-538.02, A.R.S. § 15-539, A.R.S.
§ 15-541 and A.R.S. § 15-550.
The Governing Board, except as otherwise provided by A.R.S. 15-539,
shall upon receipt of a written statement of charges from the
Superintendent that cause exists for the suspension of a certificated
teacher without pay for a period longer than ten (10) school days or
dismissal, shall give notice to the teacher of the Board's intention to
suspend without pay or dismiss the teacher at the expiration of the ten
(10) days from the date of service of the notice. If charges presented to
the Board for dismissal of a certificated person allege immoral conduct,
the charge or a resignation involving such charges shall be reported to
the Department of Education. Whenever the statement of charges by the
Superintendent allege immoral or unprofessional conduct as the cause
for dismissal, the Board may adopt a resolution to file a complaint with
the State Department of Education.
Pending disciplinary action by the State Board, the certificated teacher
may be reassigned by the Superintendent or the Governing Board may
place the teacher on administrative leave and give notice to the teacher
of the administrative leave of absence pursuant to A.R. S. 15-540. As used
in this policy, immoral conduct means any conduct that is contrary to the
moral standards of the community and that reflects an unfitness to
perform the duties assigned to the certificated staff member. The
Governing Board, upon adoption of a written statement charging a
certificated teacher with cause for suspension without pay or dismissal,
may immediately place the teacher on administrative leave of absence
and give the teacher notice of the administrative leave of absence.
Written notice of the administrative leave of absence shall be served on
the teacher personally or by United States registered mail addressed to
the teacher at the teacher's last known address. The Governing Board
shall decide whether to hold a hearing on the dismissal or suspension of a
certificated teacher without pay for a period of time longer than ten (10)
days as provided in A.R.S. 15-541.POLICY
EMPLOYEE TERMINATION -
CLASSIFIED
Unless the employee and the Governing Board sign a written agreement
to the contrary, support staff and other non-certificated employees are
employed at the will of the employee and the Board. This means that
support staff and other non-certificated employees may resign without
prior notice at any time for any reason or no reason. It also means that
support staff and other non-certificated employees may be dismissed by
the Board without prior notice at any time for any reason or no reason.
No employee shall be dismissed for a legally impermissible reason
(including but not limited to protected First Amendment expression, race,
color, sex, religion, national origin, or disability). The Superintendent is
authorized to place support staff and other non-certificated employees
on administrative leave with pay until the Board decides whether or not
to dismiss the employee. Nothing in this or any other District policy or
document is intended to create any property or contract right to
employment for any support staff or other non-certificated employee for
any specific period of time. Except as set forth in a written agreement for
employment for a specific time period, signed by the employee and the
Board, any references in any District document or policy that includes
specific time periods (such as "hourly,
" or "weekly,
" or "annual") or
specific benchmarks are intended to be descriptive only, and do not
constitute or evidence any agreement to employ any support staff or
other non-certificated employee for such time.
No supervisor or other employee may modify any employee's at-will
status, and any attempt to do so is void and of no effect. No employee
should rely on any statement made by any person that is contrary to this
Policy. Unless an at-will support staff or other non-certificated employee
receives a notice of appointment for the succeeding school year, or is re-
hired by action of the Board, the employee's employment shall
automatically terminate at the end of the school year (for employees
whose job duties are for the school year), or June 30 (for employees
whose job duties are year-round) with no action by the Board.POLICY
REDUCTION IN FORCE
The Governing Board may eliminate the position of any staff member to
effectuate economies in the operation of the District or to improve the
efficient administration of the schools or operations of the District. The
Board may consider a reduction in force ("RIF") due to budget
constraints, funding reductions, and/or reorganization due to program or
function changes, modification, elimination, or redirection. The Board
shall not use tenure or seniority in determining which certificated
teachers are retained.
The Superintendent shall pursue every other alternative to a RIF prior to
recommending the RIF procedures. This shall include, but will not be
limited to, attrition for reasons of retirement, resignation, leaves of
absence, grant funding options, non-renewals of probationary teachers,
reassignment, and early retirement opportunities.
The Superintendent shall submit recommendations to the Governing
Board for the elimination of District positions and the corresponding
termination of District employees filling the relevant positions.
In determining which employees will be affected by a RIF, the District has
the discretion to use one or more of the following guidelines:
Potential to reduce cost through attrition.
District educational program needs.
Possession of qualifications, certifications, and endorsements
required for positions necessary to meet District educational program
needs.
Overall general experience.
Completion of job-related training.
Past contributions to District educational program needs.
Employee performance.
Employee adherence to workplace expectations.
Other factors relevant to continuity of District operations.POLICY
PERSONNEL RECORDS
The District’s Human Resources department is responsible for
establishment and maintenance of official personnel records for all
District employees.
The District shall maintain a copy of all employment contracts or notices
of appointment, reclassification, or salary changes, performance related
documentation, and any resignation or termination documentation.
Any formal discipline or letters of direction issued shall be maintained in
the personnel file. No employee shall have authority to purge discipline
records from a personnel file without written approval from the Director
of Human Resources.
Under no circumstances should personnel files contain non-job-related
documents, such as garnishments or immigration records, which shall be
kept separately.
Information related to employee grievances, appeals, or employee
complaints of discrimination or harassment shall be retained separately
from the personnel records.
The District shall maintain all confidential benefits records separately
from the official personnel records, including but not limited to
confidential leave, disability, and medical records.
The District shall limit access to personnel files to authorized users for
authorized purposes. The District shall provide access to law
enforcement, regulatory agencies, or outside individuals as required by
law.
The employee shall have the right to indicate documents or other
materials in the file that may be obsolete or otherwise inappropriate to
retain. Said documents shall be reviewed by the Director of Human
Resources and removed at his or her discretionPOLICY
EMPLOYEE CODE OF CONDUCT
Employees shall:
Create and maintain appropriate relationships with students, staff,
parents, and community members, within the fulfillment of their job
duties, that are founded on trust and respect.
Maintain appropriate professional boundaries with students at all
times.
Act in a professional, respectful, and fair manner when interacting
with students, parents, co-workers, supervisors, and community
members.
Act with the goal of furthering the growth and welfare of students as
the primary objective.
Make reasonable efforts to protect students from conditions harmful
to learning, health, well-being, or safety.
Complete job duties with integrity and responsibility.
Maintain all requisite certifications, endorsements, and a fingerprint
clearance card if required for the position.
Perform only District work during District working time.
Comply with all requirements as a mandatory reporter and report all
crimes or suspected crimes as required by law or as set forth in Policy
4-204.
Provide honest, accurate, and timely information when requested
Maintain confidentiality with respect to student information and as
directed or required by law.
Maintain confidentiality with respect to employment information and
as directed or required by law (e.g., evaluations, performance plans,
renewal, or non-renewal status).
Avoid conflicts of interest and acceptance of gifts in violation of
procurement responsibilities.
Honor all contractual commitments.
Protect and secure District property.
Account for all funds collected from pupils, parents, or school
personnel.
Abide by security or administration procedures and copyright
restrictions during the administration of a test or assessment.POLICY
EMPLOYEE CODE OF CONDUCT
Employees shall:
Account for all funds collected from pupils, parents, or school
personnel.
Abide by security or administration procedures and copyright
restrictions during the administration of a test or assessment.
Promote the proper use of all District equipment and materials,
including, but not limited to, District technology.
Obtain prior written authorization from the employee's immediate
supervisor prior to working any overtime, if the employee is non-
exempt.
Follow all workplace controls to prevent workplace accidents, injuries,
and/or exposure, including following universal precautions when
necessary and completing all requisite training.
Report to work on time and be prepared for duty.
Direct criticism regarding workplace concerns to the relevant District
administrator, to the appropriate Employee Liaison, or to the Voice
Committee member.
Use copyrighted materials only for educational purposes and within
the generally accepted uses set forth by applicable law.
Staff should dress safely for the position they are in (e.g., facility and
transportation staff must wear closed toe shoes).
Comply with applicable District policies, procedures, and lawful
directives.
Comply with applicable federal and state laws, regulations, and rules.
Directs any criticism of other staff members or of any department of
the school system toward improving the District. Such constructive
criticism is to be made directly to the school administrator who has
the responsibility for improving the situation.
STAFF & STUDENT BOUNDARIES
District staff are expected to maintain appropriate boundaries with
students consistent with professional, ethical, and legal standards.
District staff shall not engage in any of the following behaviors with a
student:POLICY
STAFF & STUDENT BOUNDARIES
Flirtatious communication which includes comments on a student’s
attractiveness, and inappropriate commenting on a student's
attractiveness, appearance, or dress.
Banter, allusions, jokes, or innuendos of a sexual nature.
Confiding in an individual student on a personal and private matter.
Staff are not precluded from sharing personal anecdotes as
educational tools, however, should not burden students with personal
problems.
Except in the case where it may be required as part of their job duties,
inviting an individual student to confide in a staff member on a
personal and private matter, beyond checking in with a student on
general well-being.
Socializing with a student outside of school or a school activity, unless
in the employee’s capacity as a parent of a school-aged child, or due
to already existing family relationships or structured activities (e.g.,
scouts, coaching, clubs).
Giving of personal gifts that single out individual students
Receiving of personal gifts, except those of nominal value (e.g., plants,
pens, mugs, gift cards of a small amount).
Asking a student to keep a secret.
Having personal and inappropriate private contact with a student.
Being alone with a student behind a closed door or in a confined
space, unless required as part of your job-specific duties (e.g., one-on-
one support for ADL).
Physical contact that lacks a legitimate professional purpose. This
does not preclude gestures such as high fives, fist bumps, etc.
Sending a student on a personal errand unrelated to educational
duties.
Providing tobacco, alcohol, or drugs to a student or failing to report a
student's use of such substances.
Transporting a student in a private vehicle without administrative
approval.
Sharing a room with a student on an overnight trip.POLICY
STAFF & STUDENT BOUNDARIES
Visiting a student's home or allowing a student to visit a staff
member's home without approval from the student's parent/legal
guardian and the staff member's supervisor, unless in the employee’s
capacity as a parent of a school-aged child, or due to already existing
family relationships.
Sharing intimate or revealing photos or images or asking a student to
share intimate or revealing photos or images.
Favoring a student with special treatment, or privileges, or unearned
grade modification; this does not include activities like
public/classroom rewards or contests in which every student has an
opportunity to participate.
Addressing a student by a personalized term of endearment or pet
name or allowing a student to address a staff member by a
personalized term of endearment or pet name except as age-
appropriate terms (e.g., kiddo, buddy, or pal). Students and staff may
be addressed using appropriate nicknames and/or shortened names.
District staff should only use District approved technologies and
programs when communicating electronically with students and/or
parents/legal guardians.
SOCIAL MEDIA AND STUDENT
BOUNDARIES
Social media is the use of web-based and mobile technologies to
communicate through interactive dialogue. Social media technologies
include, but are not limited to, blogs, picture-sharing, vlogs, wall-postings,
e-mail, instant messaging, music-sharing, crowdsourcing, voice over IP
(VoIP), Facebook, LinkedIn, My Space, Twitter, You Tube, SnapChat,
Instagram, Tik Tok, and any successor protocol to transmit information.
Mobile technologies are any devices that: transmit sounds, images, texts,
messages, videos, or electronic information; electronically records, plays,
or stores information; or accesses the Internet, or private communication
or information networks. Current examples are Smartphones such as
Android and iPhones; Smart Devices such as tablets, iPads, and other
such mobile technologies and subsequent generations of these and
related devices.POLICY
STUDENT SUPERVISION
District personnel are expected to adequately supervise students in
instructional and non-instructional activities. Adequate supervision
generally requires that a staff member have a line of sight to a student
while at school or participating in a school activity. Exceptions to the line
of sight include brief periods when a student is in a bathroom, locker
room, passing between classes, sent on a campus errand, or comparable
situations, or as approved by the principal. Additionally, no staff member
is to share a room with a student on an overnight trip unless specifically
authorized in writing by the Superintendent.
MANDATORY REPORTING
All District employees who reasonably believe that a minor is or has been
the victim of child abuse or neglect will immediately report to
Department of Child Safety (DCS) or to the appropriate law enforcement
agency.
District employees are required to immediately report any exposure,
accident, or injury that occurs in the course and scope of the
performance of their job duties to their supervisor immediately. Failure to
do so may preclude a worker's compensation claim Policy 3-404.B
(Workers Compensation).
REPORTING - CHILD ABUSE
Any employee who reasonably believes that a minor is or has been the
victim of physical injury, abuse, child abuse, sexual abuse, sexual conduct
with a minor, sexual assault, molestation, sexual exploitation of a minor,
incest, child prostitution or neglect that appears to have been inflicted on
the minor by other than accidental means shall immediately report this
information to a peace officer or the Department of Child Safety.POLICY
REPORTING - CHILD ABUSE
Employee obligations as mandatory reporters also extend to conduct
between students or minors. Reports of suspected crimes or incidents
shall be made to the local law enforcement. Employees shall inform their
supervisors when a report has been made. Prior to an action to discipline
and/or terminate for failure to report, an employee will be given the
opportunity to provide a written explanation of circumstances or events
which they believe mitigate failure to report.
The parent or legal guardian of a student has the right be notified
promptly if a District employee suspects that a criminal offense has been
committed against the child by someone other than a parent, unless the
incident has first been reported to law enforcement and notification of
the parent would impede a law enforcement or Department of Child
Safety's investigation.
A person who furnishes a report, information, or records required or
authorized by law or a person who participates in a judicial or
administrative proceeding or investigation resulting from a report,
information or records required or authorized by law is immune from any
civil or criminal liability, unless such person has acted with malice or
unless such person has been charged with or is suspected of abusing or
neglecting the child or children in question.
REPORTING - CRIMES
District employees are required to report, or cause a report of, any
suspected crime against a person or property that is a serious offense,
involves a deadly weapon or dangerous instrument or that could pose a
threat of death or serious injury and any conduct that poses a threat of
death or serious physical injury to employees, students, or others on
school property.POLICY
REPORTING - CRIMES
Staff shall immediately report any of the following suspected crimes:
Any suspected crime involving a deadly weapon or dangerous
instrument.
Any suspected crime involving serious physical injury.
Any suspected crime posing a threat of death or serious physical
injury.
Arson.
Armed robbery.
Burglary.
Kidnapping.
Employees shall cause such reports to local law enforcement by
immediately reporting to their supervisor and/or the building
administrator. The supervisor and/or building administrator must provide
a copy of the report to the staff member.
The District shall notify the parent or legal guardian of each student who
is involved in a suspected crime or any conduct that is described above,
subject to the requirements of state or federal law. The District shall
observe privacy requirements as established under the Family Education
Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) when notifying parents/legal guardians.
DRUG FREE WORKPLACE
Employees shall not manufacture, distribute, dispense, be under the
influence of, purchase, possess, use, or attempt to purchase, obtain, sell,
or transfer any controlled substance, dangerous drug, narcotic drug,
precursor chemical, or alcohol in the workplace.
Employees shall not purchase, transfer, or sell in the workplace any drug
that is available by prescription only. Employees shall not be under the
influence of prescription medication, including medical marijuana, even
when used in accordance with the prescription if the use of the
medication interferes with the safe performance of the employee's job.
No employee, including a cardholder as defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801, may
possess or use marijuana on any District property.POLICY
PROHIBITION ON TOBACCO USE
Employees shall not possess or use tobacco products, including but not
limited to, cigars, cigarettes, chewing tobacco, e-cigarettes, or other
nicotine products or any "vaping" device on any school property,
including vehicles, or at any school-sponsored event.
Personal Vehicles
Notwithstanding the above, possessing otherwise lawful tobacco or
nicotine products or a vaping device in the employee's own personal
locked motor vehicle is not prohibited as long as the product or device
cannot be seen from outside the vehicle.
Use of tobacco or nicotine products in an employee's personal vehicle
while on school property or at any school-sponsored event is prohibited.
EMPLOYEE HEALTH
The District shall furnish a place of employment reasonably free from
known and recognized hazards that cause or are likely to cause death or
serious physical harm to an employee.
The District shall require employees to be inoculated against
communicable diseases or to possess an exemption as specified in
Arizona statute and regulation.
The Superintendent may require that an applicant or employee submit to
an independent medical examination at District expense as a condition of
continued employment if the District has job-related concerns regarding
the employee's ability to perform the essential functions of the
employee's position. This may include drug and alcohol testing based on
reasonable suspicion or position-specific requirements.
The District may offer as a benefit of employment an employee
assistance program to assist staff in meeting their health and wellness
goals.POLICY
EMPLOYEE LEAVE
The Board may approve a leave of absence for up to one (1) year in its
discretion. The Board shall not approve any leave of absence that
extends over one year of time beyond the employee's initial date of
absence unless otherwise required by law.
All leaves of absences shall be unpaid unless the employee has available
accrued leave.
The Board may grant employees annual general leave in accordance with
adopted benefits as delineated in policy, employment contracts, and/or
agreements with employee groups. General leave may be used at the
discretion of the employee (subject to their supervisor's approval) for
personal illness, family illness, religious observance, emergency
situations, personal business, and/or vacation.
No staff member will be allowed to accrue more than 180 days of leave.
Leave Payout Options
All employees whose accrual exceeds the maximum of 180 days at the
end of the school year will receive a payout for each day in excess of 180
days at rate provided below. Retirees, according to the ASRS, who retire
prior to age 65 with fewer than 10 years of service in FUSD shall be paid
out at $34 per day.
Blackout Dates
The following blackout dates are for 9-month employees and require
prior authorization and approval from administrators prior to submission.
Other blackout dates may exist for ten to twelve-month employees and
will be communicated by the administrator at the start of the school year.
Staff members who secure substitute coverage prior to the request will
be granted approval for personal leave.POLICY
EMPLOYEE LEAVE - CONT.
Black-out Days
The day prior or subsequent to any scheduled holiday.
The first or last instructional week of the year.
Parent/teacher conference days
Employees requesting time off during this time must submit an
alternative conference schedule with their request in order to be
considered.
Make-up
Testing days for test administrators and proctors.
Personal Leave Requests
Each staff member is granted personal days per year. No more than ten
percent (10%) of the staff or other groupings of employees may take
personal leave at any one time. Requests for personal leave must be
received at least four (4) working days prior to the first day of leave and
must be approved by the employee’s supervisor. Requests shall be
considered in order of receipt. Approval may be limited due to such
things as number of requests made for a specific time period and the
impact on District resources.
Vacation Leave
The Board may grant employees annual vacation leave in accordance
with adopted benefits as delineated in Policy, employment contracts
and/or agreements with employee groups. Accrual of vacation time is
based on an employee’s FTE and will be prorated accordingly.
Sabbatical Leave
The Board may grant sabbatical leave to certificated teaching and
administrative personnel for a maximum of one (1) year in accordance
with state law.POLICY
EMPLOYEE LEAVE - CONT.
Jury Duty
The Board shall grant leave for an employee to respond to a summons for
jury duty, participate in the jury selection process, or actually serve on a
jury.
Employees shall reimburse the District for jury duty pay received. Failure
to reimburse the District at the completion of the jury duty service will
result in a deduction of pay equal to the number of contract days missed.
Voting
The District shall permit employees to be absent for the purpose of
voting at a primary or general election if there are less than three (3)
consecutive hours between the opening of the polls and the beginning of
the employee's regular workday or between the end of the employee's
regular workday and the closing of the polls. In that event, the District
shall pay for the hours the employee must be absent to vote.
Military Leave
An employee who is a member of the Military Reserve or National Guard
shall be entitled to leave of absence without loss of pay, time, or
efficiency rating when engaged in field training.
Any employee who voluntarily or involuntarily enters uniformed service
in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States will be placed on
a military leave of absence for the duration of the service up to a period
of five (5) years. The District will also grant a leave of absence for
purposes for training duty or to attend camps, maneuvers, formations, or
drills under order with any branch, reserve, or auxiliary of the federal or
state armed services. Such leave is unpaid unless the employee uses
accrued leave to provide compensation. Employees serving in the armed
forces shall have the right to be re-employed by the District as provided
under federal law.POLICY
EMPLOYEE LEAVE - CONT.
Victim Leave
The District shall permit an employee leave to attend a criminal
proceeding if the employee is the victim of a crime and is exercising a
right to be present at a proceeding as defined in state law. Such leave is
unpaid unless the employee uses accrued leave to provide
compensation. The District may require the employee to provide
documentation as issued by law enforcement.
FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
The District complies with the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and
will grant up to twelve (12) weeks of leave during a twelve (12) month
period to eligible employees or up to twenty-six (26) weeks of military
caregiver leave.
To be eligible for leave under this Procedure, employees must meet the
following requirements:
Have worked at least twelve (12) months for the District;
Have worked at least 1,250 hours for the District during the twelve
(12) months immediately preceding the date the leave would
commence; and
Be employed by at a worksite where fifty (50) or more employees are
employed by the District within seventy-five (75) miles of that
worksite.
To qualify as FMLA leave under this Procedure, the leave must be for one
of the following reasons:
The birth of a child or placement of a child with the employee for
adoption or foster care.
To care for a spouse, child, or parent who has a serious health
condition.
For a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to
perform the essential functions of the employee's job.
For any qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that a spouse, child,
or parent is a military member on covered active duty or on call to
covered active-duty status.
To care for a covered service member with a serious injury or illness.POLICY
EARNED PAID SICK TIME
The District grants all employees up to forty (40) hours of earned paid
sick time ("EPST") per fiscal year, and with exception to temporary staff,
earned paid sick time is included in your personal leave accrual.
Definition
"Family members" means the employee's spouse or registered domestic
partner, children (regardless of age), parents, grandparents,
grandchildren, and siblings. Family members include those family
relations resulting from adopting, foster care, step-relationships, legal
guardianships, domestic partnerships, through marriage, or loco parentis
status. Family members also include any other individual related by blood
or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of
a family relationship.
Accrual
EPST will be provided and available for use upon completion of ninety
(90) calendar days of employment. EPST is paid at the employee's regular
rate of pay. EPST may be used in the smaller of hourly increments or the
smallest increment that the District's payroll system uses to account for
absences or use of other time. Accrual begins on the date of hire.
Employees accrue EPST of one (1) hour for every thirty (30) hours worked
for up to a total of forty (40) hours annually and is included in an
employee's personal leave. Employees will be provided with 3 days of
time up front for Earned Paid Sick Time.
Unused EPST will not be compensated at the time of separation.
Employees who are rehired within nine (9) months of separation will have
their prior bank of unused EPST reinstated.
EPST does not count towards the calculation of overtime.POLICY
MILITARY LEAVE
An employee who is a member of the Military Reserve or National Guard
shall be entitled to leave of absence without loss of pay, time, or
efficiency rating when engaged in field training. Any member of a federal
or state uniformed service branch may request a military leave of
absence for the duration of the service up to a period of five (5) years.
When an employee receives notice of a need to report for military duty,
the employee must notify the employee's supervisor and provide any
orders issued.
Under the Uniformed Services Employment Reemployment Rights Act
(USERRA), any individual who leaves a District position to enter active
duty in the Armed Forces, voluntarily or involuntarily, is entitled to return
to the employee's job after discharge or release from active duty if the
employee meets the following eligibility criteria:
The employee holds any other than "temporary" job with the District.
However, the job need not be classified as regular or benefits eligible.
The employee leaves the District job for the purpose of going on
active duty and gave the District notice of military duty.
The employee does not remain on active duty longer than five (5)
years, with certain exceptions as outlined by USERRA.
The employee is discharged or released from active duty under
honorable conditions.
The employee applies for reemployment with the District according to
the following schedule:
If the duration of service is less than thirty-one (31) days: Within the
first full regularly scheduled work period on the first full working day
following completion of the period of military service that starts at
least eight hours after the person has been safely transported from
the place of military service to the individual's residence;
If the duration of the service is more than thirty (30) calendar days,
but less than one-hundred and eighty-one (181) calendar days: Within
fourteen (14) calendar days after the completion of the period of the
military service; or
If the duration of the service is more than one hundred and eighty
(180) days: Within ninety (90) calendar days after the unconditional
release from military service.POLICY
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
All employees are able to use their personal and/or vacation leave for up
to five (5) workdays of bereavement leave per year for an in-state death
or up to ten (10) work days of bereavement leave per year for an out-of-
state death, for immediate family.
For the purpose of this policy, immediate family is defined as follows:
Spouse/domestic partner
Children
Parents/legal guardians
Siblings
Grandparents
Grandchildren
Aunt or uncle
Parents of spouse/domestic partner
Brother or sister of spouse/domestic partner
Sons-in law or daughters-in-law
An individual permanently residing in the employee's household
LEAVE ASSISTANCE
A "benefited employee" (one who earns leave days from the District as
part of that employee's work compensation package) who has depleted
earned leave days and continues to be absent from work may request
access to the medical leave assistance program by submitting a request
for assistance form to the Superintendent. The application must be
supported by documentation from a health care professional confirming
the need for receipt of medical leave bank assistance related to health
needs.
A benefited employee may be eligible to apply for medical leave
assistance for a serious illness or extraordinary circumstance associated
with a non-work-related incident.
Only benefited employees who have thirty (30) or more days of
accumulated personal leave may donate leave days and must have thirty
(30) days remaining after donation.POLICY
LEAVE ASSISTANCE CONT.
District employees processing the donation will not disclose the name[s]
of employees who have donated leave days to an individual.
No benefited employee shall be eligible for the medical leave assistance
program after having qualified for short term disability benefits, long-
term disability coverage, or for worker's compensation benefits.
For purposes of this program, a day equals the number of hours
scheduled in the normal working day of the donor. Donated leave shall be
increased or reduced proportionally based upon the difference in
salaries/wages between the donor and benefited employee.
Persons donating leave days will have those days deducted from their
accrued leave days.
All parties (donor and benefited employee) may have personal tax
consequences related to the donation or receipt of leave time. The
District does not provide individual tax advice to the employee.
Employees shall bear the personal tax consequences (if any) of the
donation or acceptance.
Employees who meet the requirements of thirty (30) days of leave may
donate to a general donation leave bank. The District will solicit
contributions twice a year for the general donation leave bank.
Employees eligible for leave donation can receive up to forty (40) hours
of leave from the general donation leave bank and then must solicit for
time.
DISCRIMINATION COMPLAINTS
Employees may file complaints alleging workplace discrimination or
harassment based upon a protected class category pursuant to the
following Governing Board policies:
Policy 1-202: Equal Employment Opportunity and Non-Discrimination
Policy 1-203: Equal Employment Opportunity - Prohibited Sex
Discrimination (Title IX)POLICY
EMPLOYEE GRIEVANCES
"Grievant" means an individual who currently is employed by the District
on a full-time or part-time basis who files a grievance pursuant to this
Policy.
“Grievance" means a complaint by a Grievant alleging that a
supervisor or administrator has violated, misinterpreted, or inequitably
applied a Governing Board policy or procedure related to compensation,
benefits, or terms and conditions of employment.
The alleged violation of Board policy or procedure must personally,
directly, and negatively affect the Grievant. At the discretion of the
Superintendent, multiple grievances regarding the same subject matter
may be consolidated if received within a fifteen (15) business day period.
Each individual must be personally, directly, and negatively impacted.
Matters specified below are excluded and not grievable.
"Immediate supervisor" means the individual who is responsible for
evaluating the Grievant. The term "Grievance" does not include:
Any matter for which the method of review or appeal is prescribed by
law or other District policy.
Any matter relating to any policy or procedure contained in Chapter 5
of the Board policies (Students).
Any matter related to letters or memoranda of direction or
counseling.
Any matter related to employee discipline, non-renewal, or dismissal.
Any matter related to performance evaluations or improvement
plans.
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION
Supervisory personnel is prohibited from taking adverse personnel action
against an employee as a result of an employee's good faith disclosure of
alleged wrongful conduct to a public body on a matter of public concern,
as set forth below. No adverse personnel action may be taken against an
employee in knowing retaliation for any lawful written disclosure of
information on a matter of public concern to a public body if the
employee discloses, and in good faith believes, that any of the following
occurred: (1) a violation of any law; (2) mismanagement; (3) gross waste of
public funds; or (4) an abuse of authority.POLICY
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
The District is required to provide reasonable accommodation to
qualified individuals with disabilities who are employees or applicants for
employment, except when such accommodation would cause an undue
hardship. A reasonable accommodation is a modification or adjustment
to a job, the work environment, or the hiring process.
The District shall provide reasonable accommodations as they relate to
three aspects of employment:
Ensuring equal opportunity in the application process;
Enabling a qualified individual with a disability to perform the
essential functions of a job; and
Making it possible for an employee with a disability to enjoy equal
benefits and privileges of employment.
An applicant seeking an accommodation to participate in the application
process should direct that request to the District's human resources
department.
An employee who seeks an accommodation to perform the essential
duties of the employee's position shall direct that request to the District's
human resources department.
MEET AND CONFER
The Governing Board of the Flagstaff Unified School District and its
employees declare that providing a quality education for students is their
mutual goal. The group recognizes that this goal is best achieved through
open communications, mutual trust, understanding, and cooperative
efforts of the Board, administration, and staff. It is essential that all
parties trust that District resources will be utilized in a way that will
provide positive working conditions for all employees while nourishing
and protecting the welfare of the students.POLICY
MEET AND CONFER CONT.
The Governing Board of the Flagstaff Unified School District requires the
Superintendent to form and maintain a District-wide employee
communication and input system. This system must provide equal
opportunity to all regular status employees of the District, both to be
elected to a District employee representation committee and to vote for
an association/organization to represent them. Any
association/organization so recognized by democratic majority vote of its
representation group must take on the full duty of fair representation,
including the obligation to represent all employees fairly, in good faith,
and without discrimination, irrespective of membership status.
Any committee created by this policy is not granted any authority to
make binding decisions. Eligibility of candidates for the committee shall
not be based upon national origin, age, gender, sexual orientation, race,
ethnicity, and/or District years of service. Regular employees are defined
as current District certificated staff, licensed professionals,
administrative staff, and support (classified) staff members with regular
District work schedules issued by Human Resources. Regular staff does
not include temporary, short-term/stipend only, substitute staff,
contractors, or sub-contractors.
The Governing Board expects all parties to meet in good faith and in a
manner that promotes mutual trust and understanding. Nothing in this
policy is intended to, or shall be construed as preventing individual
employees or representatives of other employee groups from freely
communicating with the Board on the matters covered by this policy.
VOICE COMMITTEE
The District will form a Voice Committee to obtain input on the working
conditions of its employees. One classified representative and one
certified representative from each school site, and a classified
representative from each district site (facilities, transportation, district
office). Members of the committee are responsible for gathering and
sharing information. This group has the ability to recommend items to
the Negotiations Committee.POLICY
NEGOTIATIONS COMMMITTEE
Negotiations is tasked with review and recommendation of working
conditions as they relate to compensation, paid benefit adjustments, and
relevant District policies. Recommendations from Negotiations are
provided to the Superintendent for review and then to the Governing
Board as potential action items. Membership on the Negotiations
Committee consists of full-time employees from the following groups:
Certified Representation Group. The Certified RG consists of teaching
and professional staff employed and paid on the certified or licensed
professional pay scale. The Certified RG has one (1) vote to be case by
the Certified Liaison (or designee). The Certified RG is comprised of
the following membership: High School Teacher, Middle School
Teacher, Elementary School Teacher, Licensed Professional, Certified
Liaison,Licensed Professional.
Classified Representation Group. The Classified RG consists of
personnel paid on the classified pay scale. The Classified RG has one
(1) vote to be cast by the Classified Liaison (or designee). The
Classified RG is comprised of the following membership:
Transportation, School Site Front Office, Paraprofessional/Aide,
Facilities and Classified Liaison.
Site Administration Representation Group. The Administration RG
consists of personnel paid on the administrative pay scale and
working at a school site. The Administration RG has one (1) vote to be
cast by the Administrative Liaison (or designee). The Administration
RG is comprised of the following membership: High School Principal,
Middle School Principal, Elementary Principal, Assistant Principal,
Administrative Liaison.
Ancillary/District Admin. Group. The District RG consists of personnel
paid on the ancillary pay scale and/or District Directors, Assistant
Directors, Associate Directors or Teachers on Assignment. The District
RG has one (1) vote to be cast by the District Liaison (or designee).
The RG is comprised of the following membership: Department
Director, Certified Ancillary Staff Member, Classified Ancillary Staff
Member, Coordinator/Manager/Team Leader,Central Administrative
LiaisonEMPLOYEE
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The contents of this handbook are for general information and may be
modified any time by the appropriate District personnel. The Governing
Board reserves the right to change policies, regulations and practices,
including contents within the handbook. It is essential for you to know and
abide by the federal and state laws, regulations and policies of Flagstaff
Unified School District. Policies and information contained in this
handbook were accurate at the time of printing/creation. NO statement
should be construed as a promise of future or continuing employment with
Flagstaff Unified School District. Contents of this handbook do not form a
contract of employment between FUSD and an individual employee or
group of employees.
Handbook contents at no time shall supersede applicable Federal or State
laws or Governing Board Policy. Every employee must sign the
acknowledgment statement and return to Human Resources. This is
considered to be a condition of employment at Flagstaff Unified School
District. Failure to do so may result in disciplinary action, up to and
including termination of employment. The following information is not
intended to be a complete representation of the FUSD Policy Manual, a full
copy of the manual may be found here.IMPORTANT
CONTACTS
Name Position / Description
Michael Penca Superintendent
Lance Huffman
Dawn Anderson Susan Smith Ginger Stevens Assistant Superintendent of
Curriculum and Instruction
Director of Human Resources
Director of Equity, Inclusion,
and Support
Director of Business Services
Justin Nabors Director of Operations
Troy Harris Director of Technology
Director of Educational
Frank Garcia
EnrichmentYOUR JOURNEY
HAS BEGUNLet's Grow Together